Now that you can place buildings, it is time to learn the game's core systems. This chapter teaches you about the UI hierarchy, how to examine technologies, how to craft items, and how to transfer items between inventories. You will improve your burner mining drill by crafting a wooden chest.

The main menu (e) contains several tabs.  There are also the world menu (alt + w) and mod configuration menu (control alt shift m).

The latter two do not matter for a very long time, and we will not discuss them much.

Mod UIs are divided into a two level hierarchy.

The top-level hierarchy, tabs, are things like "inventories" and "crafting".  You navigate between these with control tab and control shift tab.

One level below that are subtabs or controls, navigated with tab and shift tab.  If you are in the inventories tab, this is every possible inventory for the building for example.

UIs also offer a help system, available with shift slash.  Close help with e, returning to the UI you were in.

There are two more important keys.  K, which gives you information on what is focused if such is available, and control + wasd, which moves as far as possible in a given direction. So for example, control w is top of menu.

We will discuss research first.  While crafting lets us fix your drill, research is how you know why it matters and what to aim for.

Press t to open the game's technology window.  Tab moves between its parts: the research queue, the list of every technology, the selected technology's details, the buttons over the technology tree, and the tree itself.

The window opens on the tree, at the selected technology.  The tree is laid out in layers from top to bottom.  Up arrow goes to a technology this one needs, down arrow to a technology it unlocks, and left and right arrows move along the layer.

Enter selects the technology you are on, and the tree centers on it.  Its details then say what it needs and what it gives.  Each technology also says whether it is researched, available or unavailable.

The list of every technology can be searched with control f, the game's own search.

Right now you have two available technologies, steam power and electronics.

Factorio has two kinds of technology, technology which you select and technology which automatically unlocks.  Both currently available technologies have an unlock condition instead of a science requirement.  To find out what it is, select the technology with enter, then tab to its details.

in this case, electronics is "craft 10 copper plate" and steam power is "craft 50 iron plate".

We now know what we need.  How do we get it?  Close the technology window with escape, open your main menu, go to the crafting tab, then search for plate.

If you click either of the plate recipes, the game will tell you that you can't craft it!  That's because these must be done in a machine.

To find out what machines you can craft something in, press k.  This will also tell you what it needs as ingredients.

You may also want to know what outputs of a recipe are for.  For this, press y to find out what kind of thing it is and what properties it has.

We can't easily filter to machines you have, but if you check all of them you will find out that in this case the one you have is a stone furnace.

you started the game with one, but the reason that the stone from earlier in this tutorial is so useful is that you can now use it to make more.

Now, back to fixing your burner mining drill.  Stone furnaces require coal to function.  Coal and ore goes in and plates come out.  This is not obvious from the crafting menu, and indeed electric furnaces don't need the coal.  In general, you can recognize if a device needs fuel by seeing if it complains about not having any, or checking if it has a fuel inventory.

If we don't have a stable supply of coal, it is not possible to make progress.

We will fix this by making a wooden chest.  Use the scanner to find a tree, then let Kruise Kontrol mine a few for you.

This will give you wood.  Very few things use wood, so don't worry about running out.

Once you have some, you can craft a wooden chest.

Earlier, you found where the burner mining drill drops coal.  Go back there (you can find the drill with the scanner), and place the chest on that tile.

If the chest is in the right place and the drill has fuel, it will now begin to slowly fill the chest with coal.

Soon, we will discuss more efficient ways to keep the burner mining drill going.  The important thing to know for now is that it produces more coal than it uses.

That means that you can put coal from the drill back into the drill to keep it running.

You have a few ways to get stuff out of the chest.

First and second are control click/right click, like you are doing a smart insert, but this time with an empty hand.  In this case, the game will take things out intelligently.  For a chest, this is "remove everything".

You empty your hand by pressing q.  Q serves a second function when your hand is already empty, which we will discuss later.  If it says it put something in your hand instead, hit q again.

Third is by opening the inventory itself.  You can click items to put them in hand, then press q to empty your hand to your inventory.  Alternatively, shift click will move things to your inventory one full slot at a time, and shift right click will move half of whatever is in the slot.

We call these sibling inventories, and it also works in reverse.  If you explore the available tabs for the chest, you will see that the other one is your own inventory.  The shift click controls will work in your inventory to instead move things to the chest.

Your responsibility for now is to keep an eye on this setup.  Every so often, the drill will require more fuel.  You will need to grab some coal from the chest and put it in the drill when it runs out.  Soon, we will have a few ways of fixing this that do not require you to keep checking in.

Before we close this chapter, you should know that you are now producing pollution.  This tutorial doesn't spend much time on it because you are supposed to be in peaceful, but it does matter even there.

As the game goes on, your factory produces pollution.  How much depends on how many machines you have built and how many are running at a given time.  This single drill produces a very small amount very slowly, but as you build more you produce it faster and faster.

As enemy spawners see pollution, they get stronger.  And if you aren't in peaceful, they eventually come at you.

Pollution spreads realistically as a cloud starting at your machines.  You can get the amount at your cursor with shift u.

In the next chapter, we will talk about faster ways of moving around, then we will get to smelting to unlock those technologies.
