It is now time to set up steam power and lab research.

Before you continue with this tutorial, use your knowledge to craft a steam engine, a boiler, an offshore pump, a lab, a pipe to ground, 4 or 5 regular pipes, and at least one electric pole.

You could also craft transport belts and inserters, but we don't teach those now because you need a whole bunch to do anything with them.  On future runs, this is where you would start automating while you wait.

You should know enough from previous chapters to get this far without our help.  The only thing that is new is that the electric pole recipe outputs two electric poles per run, which means that if you do the math you will find that it is taking 0.5 wood each.

In those cases, it is never possible to just craft one.  You will always get at least two.

Once you craft the lab, the technology automation science pack will complete itself, and you have now reached the first set of traditional technologies and the main driving loop of Factorio.

You should take this time to check a few things.  This tutorial will spell out what they are, because they are how you find out what to do next in general.

First find the technology "logistic science pack".  To figure out what to aim for, you always aim for the next science pack, at least until you can research the rocket silo.

If you press k on it, you'll notice that this takes 75 automation science packs.

Next, find the automation science pack recipe.  Notice that it takes 5 seconds on top of the ingredients.  Those ingredients also take time.

If you did this by hand, it would take quite a long time.  Later technologies need multiple science packs at once, and run into the hundreds and even the thousands.  Until now, Factorio may have felt like a weird survival game.  But now you are at the core of the game, and the core of the game is figuring out how to scale up production to meet the demand of the labs.

By the end of the game, even a sighted player doesn't have to walk to build, as their robots will just do it for them.

Sometimes, your next science pack is locked until you meet the prerequisites. In this case, you find it in the row of locked technologies.

Since there's a ton of technologies, we will provide a minor spoiler.  You want to unlock logistic science pack.  From there, you can do chemical and military science packs.  After that, production and utility science packs are doable, and with all of them unlocked you can research the silo and win the game.

The research you actually care about right now is "automation", which gets you an assembling machine.  Assembling machines craft for you.  When fed ingredients, they can make anything you can make.  The version you unlock now is slower than you, but you can run as many as you can supply at a time.

This tutorial keeps giving you item properties, but now is a good time to tell you how to get those yourself.

k also works in your inventory, and provides a lot of details.  It also works on the map, though the map version is much less verbose.

y in the crafting menu will tell you what all of the products of a recipe do.  On the map, it reads all of the properties of the item in hand.

This chapter of the tutorial has attached example blueprints.  What we are about to explain is complicated, so we have provided pieces you can look at.

As a reminder, you can get to the example blueprints with tab.

Blueprints are like buildings, but place more than one structure at a time and place what are called ghosts instead of real structures.  If you have the items, invoking Kruise Kontrol on a ghost will build all ghosts it can find, filling out the blueprint for you.

in this way, you can share structures with others.

Like with buildings, you are building from the northwest corner of the setup.

The two example blueprints here are the boiler assembly we are about to describe, and an example of a working pipe to ground pair.

These blueprints are permanent items which go to your inventory when your hand is emptied.  You can destroy them instead with control backspace, either from the map with it in your hand or from an inventory with it focused.

Control backspace is dangerous delete, used when destroying something you can't get back. This applies to various kinds of items containing data.

To answer a commonly asked question, you cannot destroy regular physical items this way.  The only way to destroy regular items is to put them in a chest, then shoot the chest.

The first thing you want to do now is find water.  This is in the resource category of your scanner.  Your cursor is placed on the part of the water closest to your character.  Get your character over there.  Note that your character cannot swim, so you need it to be on land.

this tutorial will explain the setup from the south to north.  The setup we are going to build is 3 tiles wide and 11 tiles high.  You will want to use cursor skipping to make sure you have enough room, and you will want it to be near water.

the southmmost building to place is a boiler facing north.  This is a 3 wide by 2 high building that converts water to steam.

Once you have placed it, explore it and you will find 3 connection points on the edge.  On the southwest and southeast corners are two water connections, and in the middle of the north side is where steam comes out.  The mod tells you which direction the connection faces.  In this case, the southwest connection faces west, and the southeast connection faces east.

To connect entities that use fluids together, you place a pipe or another entity next to the connection point in the direction it is facing. So, in this case, a pipe to the west of the boiler's southwest corner would work.  Being to the west does matter.

Also notice that the mod doesn't say that the water connections are inputs.  The convention here is that the mod doesn't say when it can go in both directions.  You can connect a line of boilers together and give water to the first one, and everything in line will get some.

Next, place the steam engine.  It is 3 wide by 5 high.  Count 5 tiles up from the northwest corner of the boiler.

If you explore the steam engine, you will see that it has a bidirectional steam connection at the top center and bottom center.  If you placed it right, the south-facing steam connection is one tile north of the boiler's north-facing output, and the setup is now 3 wide by 7 high.

In a minute, we will give the boiler water and fuel, and that will fill the steam engine with steam.  When you scale power, you can stack multiple steam engines on top of each other, and they can feed each other.

Third, north of the northwest corner of the steam engine, place a small electric pole.

Electric poles move electricity.  The game automatically handles wires, so you can think of them like wireless power transmitters.

They have two values, the supply range and the wire reach. Don't worry about the wire reach for now, as we will cover it in a later chapter.

The supply area of a small electric pole is a 5x5 box with the pole at the center.  If any part of an adjacent building is in that box, it will interface with this electric pole.  Electric pole supply areas are always presented like this, as well as most other "box"-shaped ranges.

Right now your electric pole is feeding from the steam engine because the steam engine is in range.  It doesn't matter where it is relative to the steam engine, as long as it is close enough.

Next, count 3 north from the pole and place the lab, making the setup 3 tiles wide by 11 tiles high.

Now we need to get this setup some water.

Offshore pumps draw water from water tiles.  A pump stands on a land tile at the edge of the water and faces the water, and the water comes out of its back.  The game turns the pump to face the water for you.

To find a spot, get your character near water, put an offshore pump in hand, and refresh the scanner.  The build spots category then lists every place within 30 tiles of your character where the pump fits, closest first.  Press control page up and down to reach it.  The scanner puts your cursor on the spot, and left bracket builds the pump there.  Then, find the pump with your scanner.

Pipes are a little bit magical.  Factorio models fluids as instant teleportation.  If a pipe has water in it and something at the other end needs it, then the thing at the other end gets the water even if it is a very long pipe.

Factorio limits this to around 300 tiles, and counts buildings in that length. Later on, you may see a "pipeline overextended" error.  In that case, you have to make it shorter or use pumps, which you unlock later.

Careful here.  Offshore pumps and pumps are not the same thing.

Factorio also does not allow mixing two fluids in the same pipe.  That doesn't matter much now, but will definitely matter later.

The placement rule for pipes is that a pipe connects to everything it can. So, if you place 9 pipes in a 3x3 box, you get a 3x3 pipe-like thing where all pipes connect up.  In this case, putting a pipe next to the boiler's water connections connects it to the boiler, putting a pipe next to the water output of the offshore pump connects it to the offshore pump, and drawing a line of pipes to the boiler connects the boiler to the water.

You can tell if the pipe is working because the offshore pump, all of the pieces of the pipe, and the boiler will all say they have water in them.  Each pipe segment holds up to 100 units, ready to be dispensed to whatever needs it.

Unfortunately, you cannot walk through pipes.  That is one of the functions of a pipe to ground.

The pipe to ground is more complicated.  It only connects to a pipe "in front" of it.  That is, if you face it north it must be south of a pipe to connect.  The facing direction is the above ground portion of an underground pipe tunnel.

If you place two in a line close enough together, they connect underground.  The rule is that they may be separated up to 9 tiles.  So, you could place one facing west at say (5, 0), and that would connect to a second one facing east at (10, 0).

If you then placed a third facing east at (7, 0), though, it would link to (5, 0) and disconnect (10, 0).

You can visualize these exactly like a buried garden hose, where the hose ends are the pieces that you are placing and they are pointing in the direction you should face those pieces.

The other function of a pipe to ground is to let you run pipes close together without mixing fluids.  Unfortunately, practical examples of doing that are many hours away.

In either case, your immediate goal is to hand-craft 10 automation science packs, get water and coal in the boiler, put the science packs in the lab, then open the technology window with t, find automation, and press shift enter on it to start its research.

Shift enter puts a technology at the back of the research queue, the first part of the technology window.  Since you haven't got anything else running, it's up next.  The queue says how far along each research is, and the cancel button beside an entry takes it out of the queue.  Outside the window, the status part of the screen, reached with control tab, reads research progress too.

If everything is working, your steam engine, lab, and boiler will all begin to make audible noise.  All factorio buildings make some sound when they are working, so sudden silence is usually the sign of a problem.

Once automation science is complete, you will be able to use assembling machines to automate crafting. And to automate item transfer between the machines and labs, we will next cover transport belts and inserters.
